Qdrant integration tutorial (#3771)
astronomer/docs: learn/airflow-qdrant.md

id: airflow-qdrant
sidebar_custom_props: { icon: 'img/integrations/qdrant.png' }
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';

[Qdrant](https://qdrant.tech/) is an open-source vector database and similarity search engine designed for AI applications.

In this tutorial, you'll use the [Qdrant Airflow provider](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-qdrant/stable/index.html) to write a DAG that generates embeddings in parallel and performs semantic retrieval based on user input.

Airflow is useful when running operations in Qdrant based on data events or building parallel tasks for generating vector embeddings. By using Airflow, you can set up monitoring and alerts for your pipelines for full observability.

## Time to complete

This tutorial takes approximately 30 minutes to complete.

## Prerequisites

- A running Qdrant instance. A [free instance](https://cloud.qdrant.io) is available.
- The Astro CLI. See [Install the Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/install-cli).
- A [HuggingFace token](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/security-tokens) to generate embeddings.

## Step 1: Set up the project

1. Create a new Astro project:

> ```bash

Reviewer: If you tab these in they'll render in line with the numbered steps

mkdir qdrant-airflow-tutorial && cd qdrant-airflow-tutorial
astro dev init
```

2. To use Qdrant within Airflow, install the Qdrant Airflow provider by adding the following to your `requirements.txt` file:

```text
apache-airflow-providers-qdrant==1.1.0
```

## Step 2: Configure credentials

> Add the following configuration to your `.env` file to create Airflow connections between Airflow and HuggingFace and Qdrant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following to your `.env` file to create Airflow connections between Airflow and HuggingFace and Qdrant. Make sure to update with your HuggingFace access token and Qdrant instance details.
```

```text
HUGGINGFACE_TOKEN="<YOUR_HUGGINGFACE_ACCESS_TOKEN>"
AIRFLOW_CONN_QDRANT_DEFAULT='{
    "conn_type": "qdrant",
    "host": "xyz-example.eu-central.aws.cloud.qdrant.io:6333",
    "password": "<YOUR_QDRANT_API_KEY>"
}'
```

> ## Step 3: Add the data corpus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 3: Add your data
```

---
title: "Orchestrate semantic querying in Qdrant with Airflow"
sidebar_label: "Qdrant"
description: "Learn how to integrate Qdrant and Airflow."
id: airflow-qdrant
sidebar_custom_props: { icon: 'img/integrations/qdrant.png' }
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';

[Qdrant](https://qdrant.tech/) is an open-source vector database and similarity search engine designed for AI applications.

In this tutorial, you'll use the [Qdrant Airflow provider](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-qdrant/stable/index.html) to write a DAG that generates embeddings in parallel and performs semantic retrieval based on user input.

> Airflow is useful when running operations in Qdrant based on data events or building parallel tasks for generating vector embeddings. By using Airflow, you can set up monitoring and alerts for your pipelines for full observability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Airflow provides useful operational and orchestration when running operations in Qdrant based on data events or building parallel tasks for generating vector embeddings. By using Airflow, you can set up monitoring and alerts for your pipelines for full observability.
```

something like that? shift from active voice and a little more specific in relating the qdrant operations to Airflow options?

## Time to complete

This tutorial takes approximately 30 minutes to complete.

## Prerequisites

- A running Qdrant instance. A [free instance](https://cloud.qdrant.io) is available.
- The Astro CLI. See [Install the Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/install-cli).

> - A [HuggingFace token](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/security-tokens) to generate embeddings.

Reviewer 2: Everytime I see `huggingface` it makes me think of Alien.

## Step 1: Set up the project

1. Create a new Astro project:

    ```bash
    mkdir qdrant-airflow-tutorial && cd qdrant-airflow-tutorial
    astro dev init
    ```

> 2. To use Qdrant within Airflow, install the Qdrant Airflow provider by adding the following to your `requirements.txt` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. To use Qdrant in Airflow, install the Qdrant Airflow provider by adding the following to your `requirements.txt` file:
```

> 
>         ```text
>     apache-airflow-providers-qdrant==1.1.0
>     ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

    ```text
    apache-airflow-providers-qdrant==1.1.0
    ```
```

## Step 2: Configure credentials

> Add the following to your `.env` file to create Airflow connections between Airflow and HuggingFace and Qdrant. Make sure to update with your HuggingFace access token and Qdrant instance details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the following code to your `.env` file to create Airflow connections between Airflow and HuggingFace and Qdrant. Make sure to update the sample code with your HuggingFace access token and Qdrant instance details.
```

    ```text
    HUGGINGFACE_TOKEN="<YOUR_HUGGINGFACE_ACCESS_TOKEN>"
    AIRFLOW_CONN_QDRANT_DEFAULT='{
        "conn_type": "qdrant",
        "host": "xyz-example.eu-central.aws.cloud.qdrant.io:6333",
        "password": "<YOUR_QDRANT_API_KEY>"
    }'
    ```

## Step 3: Add your data

> Paste the following sample data into a file called `books.txt` within your `include` directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Paste the following sample data into a file called `books.txt` in your `include` directory.
```

    6 | Pride and Prejudice (1813) | romance | Jane Austen's beloved novel revolves around the lively and independent Elizabeth Bennet as she navigates love, class, and societal expectations in Regency-era England.
    7 | The Hobbit (1937) | fantasy | J.R.R. Tolkien's adventure follows Bilbo Baggins, a hobbit who embarks on a quest with a group of dwarves to reclaim their homeland from the dragon Smaug.
    8 | The Lord of the Rings (1954-1955) | fantasy | J.R.R. Tolkien's epic fantasy trilogy follows the journey of Frodo Baggins to destroy the One Ring and defeat the Dark Lord Sauron in the land of Middle-earth.
    9 | The Alchemist (1988) | fiction | Paulo Coelho's philosophical novel follows Santiago, an Andalusian shepherd boy, on a journey of self-discovery and spiritual awakening as he searches for a hidden treasure.
    10 | The Da Vinci Code (2003) | mystery/thriller | Dan Brown's gripping thriller follows symbologist Robert Langdon as he unravels clues hidden in art and history while trying to solve a murder mystery with far-reaching implications.
    ```

## Step 4: Create your DAG

1. In your `dags` folder, create a file called `books_recommend.py`.

> 2. Copy the following code into the file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Copy the following code into the `books_recommend.py` file.
```

>     ```python

Reviewer 2: You might want to put this code into the `details` formatting feature. It lets users expand/hide the code examples in a formatted box. The end of the `Hosted worker types` docs section has one - https://www.astronomer.io/docs/astro/configure-worker-queues#hosted-worker-types

```
<details>
<strong> Recommend books DAG</strong>

code
</details>
```

        embeddings = embed_description.expand(data=books)

        qdrant_vector_ingest = QdrantIngestOperator(
            conn_id=QDRANT_CONNECTION_ID,
            task_id="qdrant_vector_ingest",
            collection_name=COLLECTION_NAME,
            payload=books,
            vectors=embeddings,
        )

        @task
        def embed_preference(**context) -> list:
            user_mood = context["params"]["preference"]
            response = embed(text=user_mood)

            return response

        @task
        def search_qdrant(
            preference_embedding: list,
        ) -> None:
            hook = QdrantHook(conn_id=QDRANT_CONNECTION_ID)

            result = hook.conn.search(
                collection_name=COLLECTION_NAME,
                query_vector=preference_embedding,
                limit=1,
                with_payload=True,
            )

            print("Book recommendation: " + result[0].payload["title"])
            print("Description: " + result[0].payload["description"])

        chain(
            init_collection(),
            qdrant_vector_ingest,
            search_qdrant(embed_preference()),
        )

    recommend_book()

    ```

> This DAG consists of 6 tasks that generate embeddings in parallel for the data corpus and perform semantic retrieval based on user input.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This QDrant Demo DAG consists of six tasks that generate embeddings in parallel for the data corpus and perform semantic retrieval based on user input.
```
numbers fewer than 10 are colloquially spelled out.

- `import_books`: This task reads a text file containing information about the books (such as title, genre, and description) and then returns the data as a list of dictionaries.

> - `init_collection`: This task initializes a collection in the Qdrant database, where we will store the vector representations of the book descriptions. The `recreate_collection()` function deletes a collection first if it already exists. Trying to create a collection that already exists throws an error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `init_collection`: This task initializes a collection in the Qdrant database, where you store the vector representations of the book descriptions. The `recreate_collection()` function deletes a collection first if it already exists. Trying to create a collection that already exists throws an error.
```

- `embed_description`: This is a dynamic task that creates one mapped task instance for each book in the list. The task uses the `embed` function to generate vector embeddings for each description. To use a different embedding model, you can adjust the `EMBEDDING_MODEL_ID` and `EMBEDDING_DIMENSION` values.

> - `embed_user_preference`: Here, we take a user’s input and convert it into a vector using the same pre-trained model used for the book descriptions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `embed_user_preference`: This task takes a user’s input and converts it into a vector using the same pre-trained model used for the book descriptions.
```

- `qdrant_vector_ingest`: This task ingests the book data into the Qdrant collection using the `QdrantIngestOperator`, associating each book description with its corresponding vector embeddings.

- `search_qdrant`: Finally, this task performs a search in the Qdrant database using the vectorized user preference. It finds the most relevant book in the collection based on vector similarity.

>     ![Qdrant demo DAG](/img/integrations/qdrant-demo-dag.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ![Screenshot of the graph view for the Qdrant demo DAG, with the each of the six steps shown.](/img/integrations/qdrant-demo-dag.png)
```

## Step 5: Run your DAG

1. Run `astro dev start` in your Astro project to start Airflow and open the Airflow UI at `localhost:8080`.

2. In the Airflow UI, run the `books_recommend` DAG by clicking the play button. You'll be asked for input about your book preference.

>     ![Qdrant reference input](/img/integrations/qdrant-reference-input.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ![Qdrant reference input shows an example of the UI where Airflow prompts you to enter your book preference.](/img/integrations/qdrant-reference-input.png)
```

3. View the output of your search in the logs of the `search_qdrant` task.

>     ![Qdrant output](/img/integrations/qdrant-output.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ![Screenshot of the Qdrant output example, that shows the title and description of the book recommendation.](/img/integrations/qdrant-output.png)
```

    6 | Pride and Prejudice (1813) | romance | Jane Austen's beloved novel revolves around the lively and independent Elizabeth Bennet as she navigates love, class, and societal expectations in Regency-era England.
    7 | The Hobbit (1937) | fantasy | J.R.R. Tolkien's adventure follows Bilbo Baggins, a hobbit who embarks on a quest with a group of dwarves to reclaim their homeland from the dragon Smaug.
    8 | The Lord of the Rings (1954-1955) | fantasy | J.R.R. Tolkien's epic fantasy trilogy follows the journey of Frodo Baggins to destroy the One Ring and defeat the Dark Lord Sauron in the land of Middle-earth.
    9 | The Alchemist (1988) | fiction | Paulo Coelho's philosophical novel follows Santiago, an Andalusian shepherd boy, on a journey of self-discovery and spiritual awakening as he searches for a hidden treasure.
    10 | The Da Vinci Code (2003) | mystery/thriller | Dan Brown's gripping thriller follows symbologist Robert Langdon as he unravels clues hidden in art and history while trying to solve a murder mystery with far-reaching implications.
    ```

## Step 4: Create your DAG

1. In your `dags` folder, create a file called `books_recommend.py`.

> 2. Copy the following code into the `books_recommend.py` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Copy the following **Recommend books DAG** code into the `books_recommend.py` file.
```

`init_collection`: This task initializes a collection in the Qdrant database, where we will store the vector representations of the book descriptions. The `recreate_collection()` function deletes a collection first if it already exists. Trying to create a collection that already exists throws an error.

`embed_description`: This is a dynamic task that creates one mapped task instance for each book in the list. The task uses the `embed` function to generate vector embeddings for each description. To use a different embedding model, you can adjust the `EMBEDDING_MODEL_ID` and `EMBEDDING_DIMENSION` values.

`embed_user_preference`: Here, we take a user’s input and convert it into a vector using the same pre-trained model used for the book descriptions.

`qdrant_vector_ingest`: This task ingests the book data into the Qdrant collection using the `QdrantIngestOperator`, associating each book description with its corresponding vector embeddings.

`search_qdrant`: Finally, this task performs a search in the Qdrant database using the vectorized user preference. It finds the most relevant book in the collection based on vector similarity.

> ### Run the DAG

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 5: Run your DAG
```

> Head over to your terminal and run `astro dev start`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run `astro dev start` in your Astro project to start Airflow and open the Airflow UI at `localhost:8080`.
```

> A local Airflow container should spawn. You can now access the Airflow UI at http://localhost:8080. Visit our DAG by clicking on **books_recommend**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In the Airflow UI, run the `books_recommend` DAG by clicking the play button. You'll be asked for input about your book preference.
```

> ![Qdrant demo DAG](/img/integrations/qdrant-demo-dag.png)

Reviewer: Let's move this screenshot up into the Write the DAG section where you describe the tasks.

> Hit the **PLAY** button on the right to run the DAG. You’ll be asked for input about your preference, with the default value already filled in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

![Qdrant reference input](/img/integrations/qdrant-reference-input.png)

> After your DAG run completes, you should be able to see the output of your search in the logs of the `search_qdrant` task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. View the output of your search in the logs of the `search_qdrant` task.
```

![Qdrant output](/img/integrations/qdrant-output.png)

> There you have it, an Airflow pipeline that interfaces with Qdrant! Feel free to fiddle around and explore Airflow. The following references might come in handy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## Further reading
> 
> - [Introduction to Airflow](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/intro-to-airflow)
> - [Airflow Concepts](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/category/airflow-concepts)
> - [Airflow Reference](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/)
> - [Astronomer Documentation](https://docs.astronomer.io/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
